
    Performance Trade-Offs 

    Memory Management:

Machine Language: Memory management in machine language is such that a programmer has direct access to memory, hence maximum control of whatever memory is allocated for storing data structures, but with great responsibility, as it may result in the efficient use of memory.  

Assembly Language: Assembly language permits direct access to memory and hence perfect memory management. 

High-Level Programming Languages: 

Abstraction for memory management is provided by most high-level languages, where many programming languages explicitly control both memory allocation and garbage collection.  

    Execution Speed:

Machine Language: Machine language instructions permit execution directly in the computer's CPU, thus allowing the processor to run at the maximum possible speed.  

Assembly Language: Although the assembly language instructions are directly executed by the CPU, there is a small overhead because of the translation of these instructions to machine code.  

High-Level Programming Languages: High-level languages, in general, run slower than machine and assembly languages since they need translation into machine code and further impose additional runtime overheads. 

  

    Efficiency vs. Productivity:

Machine Language: The machine and assembly languages are focused on efficiency and low-level control, not productivity. They are best suited for performance-critical applications, where every cycle must be optimized.

    High-Level Programming Languages: Productivity and ease of development at the expense of efficiency are provided by high-level languages.

Role in Modern Software Development 

Machine, assembly, and high-level languages are still relevant in modern software development due to the following reasons. 

Relevance of Machine, Assembly, and High-Level Languages 

Machine Language: Although machine language hardly finds any place in modern software development, it forms the basis for most higher-level languages and the software systems programmed under them. It is the language by which one understands the hardware of a computer and, therefore, used mostly by compiler writers and low-level systems programmers. 

Assembly Language: Indeed, within this context, assembly language finds relevance in niches where the necessity for full control over the hardware is compulsory, such as dealing with performance optimization. 

High-Level Programming Languages: The features of productivity, readability, and portability of high-level languages have made them the most used languages in modern software development.  

    2. Assembly Languages are Meant for Specific Niches

While assembly language has now given way to high-level languages in most of the mainstream software development environments, it still becomes unavoidable in a few areas; some of them are noted below: 

Embedded Systems: Assembly language is quite common for embedded systems programming, allowing tight control of the hardware resources at hand for performance optimization in very resource-constrained environments. 

Device Drivers: Writing device drivers often need to access hardware interfaces at extremely low levels and be amenable to interaction directly with hardware. 

Performance-Critical Applications: Some of the applications that are performance-critical, where performance must be the key criterion, such as real-time systems and high-performance computing, may use hand-optimized assembly code to achieve best efficiency. 

 

References  

Gmys, J. C. (2020). A comparative study of high-productivity high-performance programming languages for parallel metaheuristics. Swarm and Evolutionary Computation, 100720.

Hyde, R. (2020). write great code, volume 2. Thinking low-level, writing high-level, 11-18.

Nanz, S. F. (2015). A comparative study of programming languages in rossetta code. International Conference on software engineering, 778-788.

 https://securityboulevard.com/2019/08/disassembly-101/
